# I405 Contribution Guide

Follow the typical Github contribution flow:
1. Create an issue about what you want to work on so we can discuss it before you spend a lot of time working on it.
2. Fork the repo and create a branch. There's no strict naming scheme on branches.
3. Do the work.
4. Open a pull request.

I405-specific policies to be aware of:
+ LLM-generated code is permitted if it is clearly marked by a comment. That being said, LLMs were
  only used to help write tests in the initial I405 implementation, and even then sparingly because
  LLMs have a tendency to write tests that mirror the implementation. Please carefully read any code
  generated by an LLM.
+ LLM-generated documentation text is NOT permitted. Using LLMs to generate diagrams is permitted, I
  guess.
+ All tests, including ignored tests, should pass: `cargo test -- --include-ignored --test-threads
  100`. We use ignored tests to indicate tests that don't finish instantly, rather than broken
  tests. At the time of writing, the slow tests are slow because they have to `sleep` because
  wolfSSL uses the system time for certain timeouts (see
  https://github.com/expressvpn/lightway/issues/203). All non-ignored tests should pass in no more
  than 1 second on single-threaded modern hardware. If you have to introduce a test that doesn't
  pass yet for some reason, use `#cfg[any()]` instead of `#[ignore]`.
  
  Also, end-to-end test must pass: `sudo ./e2e_test.py`.
+ Add tests for important parts of all "pure" behavior. Changes to the "hardware" implementations
  can be difficult to test (apart from e2e-tests), please describe what you've done to verify your
  implementation is correct because we don't test the hardware implementations (outside of the
  end-to-end test).
+ I405 is released under the MIT license. By opening a pull request you indicate that you are
  releasing your contribution under the MIT license also. No copyright assignment is required.
